docs: update joss paper draft (#305)
frederikfabriciusbjerre/caugi: paper/paper.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Graphs are a convenient, economical, and expressive way of conveying assumptions and performing inferences and other derivations that are highly relevant in the field of causality. It is one of the objects by which many researchers
```

<!-- A description of the high-level functionality and purpose of the software
for a diverse, non-specialist audience. -->

`caugi` (Causal Graph Interface) is a fast and flexible toolbox for causal graphs in `R`. 
It provides an intuitive interface for defining, manipulating, and analyzing the 
graphs that arise in causal inference and discovery. `caugi` is a causality-first package,
meaning that it is not built around generic graphs, but rather around different
classes of causal graphs, including directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), partially 
directed acyclic graphs (PDAGs), acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs), and 

> ancestral graphs (AG) to name some. `caugi` can represent many classes of causal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ancestral graphs (AG). `caugi` can represent many classes of causal
```

graphs, and the list is expanding. 

The graph data structure is implemented in `Rust`, yielding query and traversal

> operations competitive with other graph packages in `R` [@caugiperformance], still while giving 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operations competitive with other graph packages in `R` [@caugiperformance], while still giving 
```

Reviewer 2: Also "competitive" in what sense? Probably should clarify that we mean performance here.

> the user an experience as writing graphs on a whiteboard. Alongside the core

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the user an experience that resembles writing graphs on a whiteboard. Alongside the core
```

representation, `caugi` implements a wide range of causal-graph algorithms, such

> as separation tests, structural queries, adjustment-set identification, graph metrics, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as separation tests, structural queries, adjustment-set identification, and graph metrics, 
```

problems the software is designed to solve, who the target audience is, and its
relation to other work.-->

Graphs are a convenient, economical, and expressive way of conveying assumptions

> and performing inferences and other derivations that are highly relevant in the

Reviewer 2: This says "performing ... derivations". Hm, do you "perform" derivations?

Reviewer 2: Scratch that, I think it's fine.

> and performing inferences and other derivations that are highly relevant in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and performing inferences and other derivations that are relevant in the
```

are software tools that allow researchers to transfer their ideas into code and
to perform their analyses through an intuitive as well as efficient interface.
The latter is important because causal inference and discovery can be
computationally intensive, particularly in high-dimensional settings.
`caugi` is designed to meet these needs by providing a fast and flexible toolbox
for causal graphs in `R`.

The problem with many existing tools is that they

1) are not designed with causal graphs in mind and therefore lack the necessary

>    functionality for causal inference and discovery,

Reviewer: Do we want to specifically point out the edge types that are missing from many graph packages here?

Reviewer: If not, be more specific about what the necessary functionality is for causality.

   through adjacency matrices or edge lists, which can be cumbersome and
   error-prone.

`caugi` addresses these issues with an intuitive graph representation, a broad
set of algorithms for causal inference and discovery, and an interface built

> around edge operators.

Reviewer: does "edge operators" refer to the %-->% interface? If so, maybe rewrite as 

"an intuitive interface that allows users to draw graphs with nodes as R symbols and edges as infix operators. "

> around edge operators. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
around edge operators.
```

vs. contribute” justification explaining your unique scholarly contribution and
why existing alternatives are insufficient. -->

Graph packages in high-level languages such as `R` and `Python` span a wide
range of scopes, from general-purpose graph libraries to specialised

> causal-inference toolkits. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
causal inference toolkits. 
```

Where packages such as `igraph` [@csardi2006; @antonov2023] and `NetworkX`

> [@hagberg2008] are plenty fast, they are general-purpose graph packages, and

Reviewer 2: Please reconsider "plenty fast" here; it reads overly causal to me.

Reviewer: First time I've seen the casual -> causal typo in this direction! :)

> building the correct abstractions on top have been done in for example `ggm`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
building the correct abstractions on top of them has been done in for example `ggm`
```

[@marchetti2025] or `pgmpy` [@ankan2024]. It takes a lot of work to make these
abstractions correct and might require hacks, such as representing a partially

> directed graph with directed edges going in both directions and alike.

Reviewer 2: "and alike" is quite casual, I suggest we be more specific.

Then, you have packages such as `pcalg` [@kalisch2012] or `bnlearn`
[@scutari2010]. These packages have in common that they both are built around
their own graph representations, but the purpose of the packages are not the

> graph structures themselves, but rather algorithms regarding causal graphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
graph structures themselves, but rather the discovery algorithms to learn causal graphs.
```

`pcalg` represents their graphs with matrices, but how they are represented
differ between graph classes. `bnlearn` has a fast backend for some queries, but

> it is not very memory efficient, and it will run out of memory for larger

Reviewer 2: Maybe need to be careful here if we make statements like this; might need to point to our benchmarks as a minimum.

Author: Yes. True.

graphs.

> An honourable mention is `Tetrad` [@scheines1998], which is written in Java, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An honorable mention is `Tetrad` [@scheines1998], which is written in Java, and
```

British English vs American English. I usually use the latter (honorable), but at least we need to be consistent.

> An honorable mention is `Tetrad` [@scheines1998], which is written in Java, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Tetrad` [@scheines1998], written in Java, is a standalone software suite for causal discovery that
```

is quite performant and expressive, but lacks a proper interface to `R` (as it

> currently stands).

Reviewer: Ok, but even if it did, I still think there would be a need for caugi.

Then there are packages that have a bit more intuitive, causality-native

> interface as `dagitty` [@textor2016] and `MixedGraphs` [@evans2025]. The latter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interface, such as `dagitty` [@textor2016] and `MixedGraphs` [@evans2025]. The latter
```

vs. contribute” justification explaining your unique scholarly contribution and
why existing alternatives are insufficient. -->

Graph packages in high-level languages such as `R` and `Python` span a wide
range of scopes, from general-purpose graph libraries to specialized
causal inference toolkits. 

> Where packages such as `igraph` [@csardi2006; @antonov2023] and `NetworkX`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although packages such as `igraph` [@csardi2006; @antonov2023] and `NetworkX`
```

> [@hagberg2008] are fast, they are general-purpose graph packages, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@hagberg2008] are fast, they are also general-purpose graph packages, and
```

> building the correct abstractions on top of them has been done in for example `ggm`

Reviewer 2: The sentence here probably needs a bit of work. The sentence leads with "Although/where ..." and then concludes with "building the [abstractions] has been done in x and y." But if you start with "although, you need to end follow-up that up with something that contrasts that.

> [@marchetti2025] or `pgmpy` [@ankan2024]. It takes a lot of work to make these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@marchetti2025] or `pgmpy` [@ankan2024]. It takes considerable work to make these
```

> abstractions correct and might require hacks, such as representing a partially

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
abstractions correct and might require workarounds such as representing a partially
```

directed graph with directed edges going in both directions.

> Then, you have packages such as `pcalg` [@kalisch2012] or `bnlearn`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is also a group of packages that include `pcalg` [@kalisch2012] and `bnlearn`
```

> [@scutari2010]. These packages have in common that they both are built around

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@scutari2010], which feature their own graph representations
```

> their own graph representations, but the purpose of the packages are not the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
their own graph representations, but whose purposes are not the
```

graph structures themselves, but rather the discovery algorithms to learn causal graphs.
`pcalg` represents their graphs with matrices, but how they are represented
differ between graph classes. `bnlearn` pairs a fast `C` backend with a rich
learning and inference stack, but constructs its graphs through dense,
node-by-node adjacency structures whose memory grows with the square of the
number of nodes, which will cause problems for larger graphs. 

`Tetrad` [@scheines1998], written in Java, is a standalone software suite for
causal discovery that is quite performant and expressive, but lacks a proper
interface to `R` (as it currently stands).

Closer to `caugi` in spirit are packages with a causality-native interface.
`dagitty` [@textor2016] offers an expressive syntax and a large user base, but
performs its computations through a JavaScript engine called from `R`, which
imposes a serialization boundary between the two languages and limits
performance on larger graphs [@caugiperformance]. We also owe an honorable

> mention to `MixedGraphs` [@evans2025], whose treatment of mixed graphs was a

Reviewer 2: Possibly mention that MixedGraphs is not actually on CRAN?

source of inspiration for `caugi`.

> So, we found that `caugi` fills a gap in the market, combining performance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taken together, we believe that `caugi` fills a gap in the ecosystem, combining performance
```

working with causal graphs with the performance and memory safety of `Rust`.

The graph implementation is based on a compressed sparse row\ (CSR) format.
The CSR format scales memory proportionally to the number of edges and is 
particularly well-suited for more sparse graphs, which we often see in 

> causality. This representation makes queries fast(er), but mutations (more) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
causality. This representation makes queries faster, but mutations more 
```

expensive. Any structural change in principle requires rebuilding the index. 

To avoid penalizing iterative workflows, `caugi` adopts a *lazy build* strategy.
Mutations are batched and the graph is only rebuilt when the user queries the graph.
Graphs *appear* mutable from the user's perspective, while remaining immutable internally 
and always consistent when queried.

# Examples

> We first define a DAG:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We first define a DAG to represent our assumptions about cause and effect relations among the nodes, where it is assumed that the parents of that node are sufficient for determining the probability of that node:
```

> We first define a DAG:

Reviewer 2: Any reason why you dropped the more extensive description here?

Author: Well, I changed the graph, so the explanation doesn't make sense anymore. And I just didn't really see it adding value to the example. I have mostly seen these descriptions in causal inference, but there are plenty of graphs where B isn't a treatment per se, but just something else. It is only a treatment if you intervene, right? - which we can't do in caugi.

Reviewer 2: I understand, I just meant that maybe we need an updated explanation instead of no explanation? The syntax might not be self-explanatory for someone not in the field.

```r
library(caugi)

dag <- caugi(
  U %-->% X + Y,
  W %-->% X,
  X %-->% M %-->% Y,
  class = "DAG"
)
```

> Projecting out the unobserved confounder `U` yields an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the node `U` represents an unobserved (latent) confounder, the latent projection operation yields an 
```

> ADMG on `W`, `M`, `X`, and `Y`; the bidirected edge between `X` and `Y` records

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ADMG on `W`, `M`, `X`, and `Y` from which we can read of dependencies among the observed variables; the bidirected edge between `X` and `Y` records
```

confounding left behind by the latent:

```r
obs <- latent_project(dag, latents = "U")
obs
#> <caugi object; 4 nodes, 4 edges; simple: TRUE; session=0x9271562a0>
#>   graph_class: ADMG
#>   nodes: W, X, M, Y
#>   edges: W-->X, X-->M, M-->Y, X<->Y
```

> `X` and `Y` are not $m$-separated, since confounding persists in the ADMG:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`X` and `Y` are not $m$-separated, since confounding persists in the ADMG, meaning they are dependent in the distribution after marginalizing over `U`:
```

> `X` and `Y` are not m-separated, since confounding persists in the ADMG:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`X` and `Y` are not $m$-separated, since confounding persists in the ADMG:
```

```r
m_separated(obs, "X", "Y")
#> [1] FALSE
```

> but we can find the minimal d-separator in the original DAG:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but we can find the minimal $d$-separator in the original DAG:
```

> but we can find the minimal $d$-separator in the original DAG:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but we can find the minimal $d$-separator in the original DAG, i.e., the set of variables that conditional on which `X` and `Y` are independent:
```

working with causal graphs with the performance and memory safety of `Rust`.

The graph implementation is based on a compressed sparse row\ (CSR) format.
The CSR format scales memory proportionally to the number of edges and is 
particularly well-suited for more sparse graphs, which we often see in 
causality. This representation makes queries faster, but mutations more 

> expensive. Any structural change in principle requires rebuilding the index. 

Reviewer 2: Is it obvious that "the index" is here?

and always consistent when queried.

# Examples

We first define a DAG to represent our assumptions about cause and effect
relations among the nodes, where it is assumed that the parents of that node are
sufficient for determining the probability of that node:

```r
library(caugi)

dag <- caugi(
  U %-->% X + Y,
  W %-->% X,
  X %-->% M %-->% Y,
  class = "DAG"
)
```

If the node `U` represents an unobserved (latent) confounder, the latent
projection operation yields an ADMG on `W`, `M`, `X`, and `Y` from which we can
read off dependencies among the observed variables; the bidirected edge between
`X` and `Y` records confounding left behind by the latent:

```r
obs <- latent_project(dag, latents = "U")
obs
#> <caugi object; 4 nodes, 4 edges; simple: TRUE; session=0x9271562a0>
#>   graph_class: ADMG
#>   nodes: W, X, M, Y
#>   edges: W-->X, X-->M, M-->Y, X<->Y
```

`X` and `Y` are not $m$-separated, since confounding persists in the ADMG,
meaning they are dependent in the distribution after marginalizing over `U`:

```r
m_separated(obs, "X", "Y")
#> [1] FALSE
```

but we can find the minimal $d$-separator in the original DAG, i.e., the set of

> variables that conditional on which `X` and `Y` are independent:

Reviewer 2: Hm, something's off with this sentence I think.

```r
minimal_separator(dag, "X", "Y")
#> [1] "U" "M"
```

> We can easily plot side by side using the native plotting functions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can easily visualize the graphs side-by-side using the native plotting functions:
```
